
A great crisis of our times is failure to realize that we have a drive to make the world we live in a better place. Yet the smallest ways of making the world better can ultimately be the most potent, by virtue of the butterfly effect, where the smallest change in one part of the ecosystem affects large changes in other parts. The psychological mechanism of the butterfly effect is composed of the fundamental ways that social animals, including humans, communicate and cooperate: modeling, emotional display, and mimicry.

Modeling is simply exhibiting the behavior the modeler expects others to adopt. Although the evidence for the power of modeling is copious in animals, we underestimate its global influence on human behavior. We universally condemn hypocrisy, indeed are repulsed by it and consider it a form of betrayal, because it violates the implicit trust we place in modeling.

Emotional display is made up of the non-linguistic manifestations of emotions. In humans, it’s predominantly facial expressions, body language, and vocalizations. These comprise measurable vehicles of emotional contagion, noted by Hatfield, Cacioppo, and Rapson, among others, where emotions of two or more people converge and are passed from person to person in larger groups. Emotions are more contagious than any known virus.

Human beings have a drive to improve. We function at our best when trying to improve and begin to lose meaning and purpose, health and wellbeing when we stop trying to improve.

Types of improvement:

Situational: Try to make the situation you’re in more beneficial, productive, or convenient.

Experiential: Try to make your experience more comfortable, pleasant, or pleasurable

Transcendent: Try to make your situation and/or your experience more meaningful.

Try a little experiment. Note your current emotional state. Count to five, then read aloud the following improve behaviors:

Now note your current emotional state, after reading the above list aloud, you should find a slight elevation just from saying the words. Imagine the effect of enacting the behaviors.

N.B. It's impossible to improve when focused on how bad things are or on who's fault it is that they're so bad. We have to choose between blame and improvement, because we can't really do both.

Protection of valued persons is a fundamental survival instinct. In fact, the primary function of anger and aggression in humans is not self-protection, as you might think. Imagine what would make you angrier—if I were to attack you or your children. The instinct to protect loved ones generally overrides self-protection—most people would risk their lives to protect their children.


It’s well documented that we live in an era of sensory and information overload. Lost in the glare of gross-information and hyper-stimulation is the transcendent emotional state of appreciation.

Although we have a great deal more to appreciate with far less daily hardship and suffering than most of our ancestors, people report that they experience relatively little appreciation in their lives.

Appreciation requires opening your heart and allowing yourself to be enhanced by the experience of someone or something. In the act of appreciation, life means more to us; the experience of being alive seems better.

We need appreciation to:

Regulate negative moods

Break the stronghold of autopilot functioning

Give life dimension, dynamics, and color

Maintain a sense of meaning and purpose

Make us happier

Sustain intimate connection.

It’s ironic that in our era of massive social media networks and instant electronic access that people feel more disconnected. Through constant distraction, digital media has deepened the void of meaningful connection it was supposed to fill and made us more aware of how disconnected we are.

Why we need connection:

Our brains are hard-wired for it—we were never a solitary species; we’re the most social of all mammals, forming the strongest and most enduring emotional bonds.

We suffer physically and mentally from disconnection.

We become psychotic without social cues.

Types of Connection:

Basic humanity (compassion, kindness)

Familial – emotional resonance with kin

Intimate – emotional resonance and wellbeing is intertwined with another

Spiritual – relating to something larger than the self

Communal – identifying with a group of people, based on shared values, goals, or experiences.

The world can be a dangerous and frightening place to live. There seems to be no end to terrible news broadcasting through our phones, television screens, and social media feeds. One day there is a new war breaking out, another day more glaciers melt, and we all feel defeated in our desire to make the world a better place.

In all this, we question how to do good in the world. Advocating for positive change, participating in volunteerism, and challenging your negative thoughts are things that can make the world a better place. Try protesting injustices, recycle, and spread informative news that will motivate people to do better in the world.

Also, the benefits of exploring the world and pushing yourself out of your comfort zone can do a lot of good in the world! Participating in adventures like studying abroad and volunteering abroad can widen your perspectives, challenging your understanding of the world and broadening your horizons.

Just by asking what would make the world a better place, you’re practically halfway to accomplishing such a task. Of course, there are so many things that would make the world a better place. More open-mindedness around the world and a desire to understand others would be an amazing start. Unfortunately, that’s easier said than done.

A good exercise is to think about the biggest issues you see in the world, and brainstorm (or research) how to have an impact on these problems. If more people did that, the world would probably become a better place overnight! Taking action, whether big or small, can make you feel at least a little bit better about the existential issues in the world.

Of course, issues like climate change, social injustice, and rampant capitalism are hard for any single person to fight against. It’s important to remember that simply raising awareness of environmental issues, communicating cross-culturally, and speaking up against injustice is always better than doing nothing.

For more ideas of how to make a hands-on difference in the world, check out the following list. We hope you find some good ideas to make the world a better place. If you have any ideas of your own, please comment them below!

On a more tangible level, what can you do to make the world a better place? Well, going “green” (and understanding what that means) can help put an end to harmful practices that are advancing climate change.

Additionally, communicating with people across multiple cultures, countries, and regions is essential to making Earth a better place to live. Understanding different perspectives and listening to stories from people around the world gives us insight into one another.

So how do you any of the aforementioned? Check out the following list for some great ways to do good in the world.

1. Volunteer abroad for a cause that’s important to you.

2. Volunteer in your home country and/or state for a cause that’s important to your community.

3. Provide support during humanitarian crises (if you’re qualified to do so).

4. Participate in a responsible mission trip to help communities in need.

5. Study abroad to further cross-cultural understanding and bonds.

6. Register to vote. Then vote!

7. Protest injustices (without putting yourself or others in harm’s way).

8. Recycle. Also—learn how to recycle! (It’s not as easy as we were told.)

9. Pick up trash, even if it’s not yours.

10. Stop using single-use plastics.

11. Donate blood if you can.

12. Donate plasma if you can.

13. Intern or work abroad, while keeping your privilege in check.

14. Learn a new language so that you can communicate across cultures more effectively.

15. Learn a language abroad to put those cross-cultural communication skills to the test.

16. Conserve water by fixing leaky taps, showering less often (to each their own), and using water-efficient appliances.

17. Donate money to a local charity, GoFundMe page, FundMyTravel campaign, or a nonprofit.

18. Donate your old clothes and belongings to charity, if they’re in good shape.

19. Pay-it-forward and purchase a meal for a stranger.

20. Rescue an animal or volunteer at the humane society.

21. Resist the urge to gossip—it always does more harm than good.

22. Unplug from digital devices and screens for a day or two.

23. Give out compliments often.

24. Share your story with people and—

25. —listen to peoples’ stories.

26. Educate yourself on different religions and lifestyles.

27. Learn about cultures around the world.

28. Study history and politics for a good framework of how the world operates—and why.

29. Participate in meaningful travel, not just tourist-driven travel.

30. Send thank-you notes.

31. Limit purchases of fast fashion and go to thrift stores instead of malls.

32. Stand up and speak out against social inequalities.

33. Track your moods to see how often and when you are happy, and then ask yourself why.

Key points

Small actions, like picking up trash, can inspire others.

Spreading happiness and positivity benefits you and others.

Your individual actions, especially when inspiring, can create substantial change.

If I said that the world is currently suffering and it needs your help, would you agree with me? The growing gap between the rich and the poor, the climate crisis, conflicts all over the world: these are just a couple of examples of a world that needs our help.

While this list can go on and on, I'm going to focus on the positives today. Mainly, how can you help make the world a better place? What can you do to help the world, as an individual? Even though your own actions can sometimes feel insignificant when looking at the grander scheme, you still have the power to change the world for the better.

This article discusses 13 things you can do to make the world a better place. Interestingly enough, most of these things are proven to make your life more interesting and happier in the process. So let's get to it!

We all want to make the world a better place, right? Not just for ourselves, but also for future generations.

But to think we can solve all of the world's problems seems naive.

I'm always reminded of a meme that shows a person who's proud of banning the use of plastic straws, while someone else crushes that sentiment by showing a picture of the great Pacific garbage patch.

Such comparisons always raise the question: "Do my actions have any meaningful consequences?"

He wrote this to explain his motives for becoming a politician. I don't want to turn this post into a political one, but I do want to say that I really respect Barack Obama for believing in change.

But we don't all have the set of skills required to enter politics or to become a CEO of a big company. The question remains: can we still make the world a better place? By the way: Do you find it hard to be happy and in control of your life? It may not be your fault. To help you feel better, we've condensed the information of 100's of articles into a 10-step mental health cheat sheet to help you be more in control.

Even though you don't have the power to single-handedly abolish racism, solve income inequality or clean the great pacific garbage patch, you do have the power to inspire others.

Your power to inspire others is the key to making the world a better place.

Here's a fun example that always comes to mind: at the start of 2019, my girlfriend decided to become a vegetarian. I was initially hesitant, as I was afraid it would interfere with my own habits.